>> You and I have cultivated
certain awareness.
We have a certain ability
to hold more than one plane
consciously.
We may not have
integrated them fully.
Like, I know that there
is incredible pollution
and that a tremendous
amount of that pollution
is caused by automobiles and
that the wisest person is
the one that would either
walk, bicycle, and then
use the public
transportation next,
and then after that would
have an electric car
or then would have a
low-gas, high-efficiency car.
At this moment, when we
feel the potential of change
and we see that we are part
of the social institutions,
we can change all of
it from within because
of the web of communication
and the information age.
That's what we are about.
It is not just that
we do something.
It's how we do something.
And which we do is dependent
in each of you on what
your unique predicament is.
I don't know at this
moment whether I
am sitting at the bedside of
the birth of another level
of human consciousness.
Am I sitting at the bedside
of a dying or of being born?
Or is the world of
"or" just another plane
of reality and behind
it all birth and death
are the same thing
and what I'm sitting
at is the edge of the mystery?
The interesting question
you and I can look at
is, how do you
deal with mystery?
How do you deal
with the unknown?
How do you deal with it?
Well, the answer
is I don't know.
But I don't doesn't have to
be, oh my God, I don't know.
In other words, can
you live now rooted
enough in other
planes of awareness
so that you can sit with the
uncertainty of not knowing
how all this comes out
and not be immobilized
by that uncertainty?
Can you sit with it in such a
way that you are doing what you
do because it's in these--
you'd call your Dharma--
without an attachment
to how it comes out?
I will still, whether it's
going to end or begin,
the best thing I can still do
is quiet my mind so I can hear.
Truth waits for eyes unclouded
by longing, the Tao says.
I can open my heart
so I can be part
of the liquidity of the
universe, like a tree is
or like a river is.
I can take my place in
it without the mediation
of my self-conscious mind.
Well, now I'm being a tree.
I can balance discriminative
wisdom or that part that
uses the judging mind with
appreciation, with gratitude,
with appreciation for the
awesome nature of the mystery
of suffering and death.
Too little trust in
wisdom and too much
expectation about knowledge
that it takes discipline
to empty the mind
to hear the answer,
as opposed to fill the
mind with more facts.
Not that you don't use the
facts and delight in them
and play with them.
But don't make them your deity.
Don't worship the rational mind.
See it as a beautiful
instrument and a lousy master.
The opportunity you and
I have is to listen,
is to open our hearts to
grieving with each other.
When I asked Zalman
Schachter, the rabbi,
if you were an Israeli, what
would you say to an Arab?
He said, you know, before
we can hear each other,
we have to be able to
grieve with one another,
that until the Arab feels heard
by the Jew and the Jew feels
heard by the Arab,
heard in their pain,
they cannot meet as
children of the same father.
And for you to hear
your enemy's pain
requires a quality
of compassion,
and a quality of fearlessness,
and a quality of willingness
to allow your heart to be broken
again and again, embracing
the beauty of birth,
the nature of death,
the quality of suffering, being
able to look it in the eye
and say, yes, so that
you're not copping out
with reactivity into
righteousness into denial
into hysteria into violence, but
you stay wide open to what is.
You listen.
You listen your way into
hearing your part in the game.
And then you play
it with a giggle
because, after all, it's
just another mind moment.